BOOK Ι. vii

of pleasure. Indeed in sentencing his son to be be·
headed, it would seem that he actually deprived
himself of a great deal of pleasure; for he sacrificed
his natural instincts of paternal affection to the
claims of state and of his military office.

“Then , think of the Titus Torquatus who was consul
with Gnaeus Octavius3 when he dealt so sternly
with the son who had passed out of his paternal con-
trol through his adoption by Decius Silanus—when
he summoned him into his presence to answer to the
charge preferred against him by a deputation from
Macedonia, of accepting bribes while praetor in that
province—when, after hearing both sides of the case,
he gave judgment that he found his son guilty of
having conducted himself in office in a manner un-
worthy of his ancestry, and banished him for ever
from his sight,—think you he had any regard for his
own pleasure? But Ι pass over the dangers, the
toils, the actual pain that all good men cndure for
country and sor friends, not only not secking plea-
sure, but actually renouncing pleasures altogether,
and preferring to undergo every sort of pain rather
than be false to any portion of their duty. Let us
turn to matters seemingly less important, but equally
conclusive. that actual pleasure do you, Torquatus,
or does Triarius here, derive from literature, from
history and learning, from turning the pages of the
poets and committing vast quantities of verse to
memory? Do not tell me that these pursuits are in
themselves a pleasure to you, and that so were the
deeds I mentioned to the Torquati. That line of
defence was never taken by Epicurus or Metrodorus,
nor by any one of them if he possessed any intelli-
gence or had mastered the doctrines of your school.

27

