20

21

BOOK Ι. νί

thing taking place uncaused. Then also he gratuit-
ously deprives the atonis of what he himself declared
to be the natural motion of all heavy bodies, namely,
movement in a straight line downwards, and yet he
does not attain the object for the sake of which this
fiction was devised. For, if all the atoms swerve,
none will ever come to cohere together3 or if some
swerve while others travel in a straight line, by
their own natural tendency, in the first place this
will be tantamount to assigning to the atoms their
different spheres of action, some to travel straight
and some sideways; while secondly (and this is a
weak point with Democritus also) this riotous
hurly-burly of atoms could not possibly result in the
ordered beauty of the world we know. Itis also
unworthy of a natural philosopher to deny the infinite
divisibility of matter3 an error that assuredly Epi-
curus would have avoided, if he had been willing to
let his friend Polyaenus teach him geometry instead
of making Polyaenus himselfunlearn it. Democritus,
being an educated man and well versed in geo-
metry, thinks the sun is of vast size 3 Epicurus con-
siders it *perhaps a foot in diameter, for he pro-
nounees it to be exactly as large as it appears, or a
little larger or smaller. Thus where Epicurus alters
the doctrines of Democritus, he alters them for the
worse3 while for those ideas which he adopts, the
credit belongs entirely to Democritus,——the atonis,
the void, the images,a or as they call them, eidola,
whose impact is the cause not only of vision but also
of thought; the very conception of infinite space,
apeiria as they term it, is entirely derived from
Democritus; and again the countless numbers of

worlds that come into existence and pass out of
23

